Nvidia's entire empire is built on one
math operation, multiply and accumulate.
Two numbers go in, one product comes
out, and it gets added to a running
total.
That single operation, repeated
trillions of times, is why a single H100
costs $40,000.
But what if you could delete
multiplication entirely?
That's not a hypothetical. It's already
happening.
A team at Microsoft built a large
language model where every single weight
is just -1, 0, or +1.
No fractions, no decimals, no
floating-point math at all.
And the scary part for Nvidia?
It works.
Let me show you exactly how.
And stick around, because what this does
to GPU pricing is wild. In a normal
neural network, every weight is stored
as a 16-bit floating-point number.
That's FP16.
When the model runs, it takes an input
activation, multiplies it by that
weight, and adds the result to a running
sum.
Multiply, accumulate. That's the core
loop. And it demands a specialized
silicon packed with thousands of
floating-point units. Now replace that
weight with -1, 0, or +1.
What happens to the math? If the weight
is +1, you just add the input. If it's
-1, you subtract it. If it's 0, you skip
it entirely. No multiplication needed,
ever.
The entire forward pass becomes addition
and subtraction. Operations so simple, a
basic CPU can handle them.
This is called ternary quantization.
Zero multiplications in the entire
neural network. And the name itself?
It comes from a neat piece of math. Stay
with me here.
Three possible values. How many bits do
you need to represent three states?
It's not one bit, that gives you two
states. It's not two bits, that gives
you four. It's log base two of three,
which equals 1.58.
That's where the name comes from, 1.58
bit models.
Microsoft calls their version BitNetB
1.58.
And in April 2025, they dropped a two
billion parameter model trained on four
trillion tokens. Open weights, open
inference code. It matches full
precision models of the same size on
standard benchmarks.
But here's what really matters, and most
people miss this completely. The memory
savings are massive.
An FP16 weight takes 16 bits of storage.
A ternary weight takes 1.58 bits. That's
roughly a 10x reduction.
A model that needed 80 GB of VRAM now
fits in under 10.
You don't need an H100. You don't even
need a GPU. Microsoft built BitNet.cpp,
a custom inference engine that runs
these ternary models on plain CPUs. An
Apple M2 chip, a regular laptop
processor, running a billion parameter
language model at usable speed.
No [music] CUDA cores, no Tensor cores,
no $40,000 accelerator card. Now, here's
why Nvidia should be genuinely worried.
GPU makers have spent two decades
optimizing one thing,
floating point throughput.
Tensor cores, mixed precision pipelines,
HBM bandwidth. All of it designed to
move 16-bit numbers faster.
That's their moat. That's the entire
business model. Ternary models don't
need any of it.
When your weights are -1, 0, and +1, the
bottleneck shifts from raw compute to
memory bandwidth.
And memory bandwidth is not something
Nvidia owns. CPUs have it.
Custom chips can be built cheaply for
it. Even FPGAs can handle integer
addition at absurd speeds.
Training still needs GPUs for now.
Bitnet uses a trick called the
straight-through estimator.
During training, weights stay full
precision.
They get snapped to ternary values
during the forward pass, and gradients
flow back as if the rounding never
happened.
Clever workaround. And it holds up.
Some researchers push back.
They argue that as training data scales
up, the gap between ternary and full
precision models will grow.
Scaling laws might favor higher bit
weights when you hit tens of trillions
of tokens.
That's a fair point. Nobody has trained
a ternary model at GPT-4 scale yet.
But a year ago, nobody had a working
ternary model at all. But the direction
is clear.
Inference is where the money lives.
Every API call, every chatbot reply,
every AI feature in every app. That's
all inference. And if inference runs on
commodity hardware instead of premium
GPUs, the economics of the entire AI
industry flip overnight.
1.58 bits,
three values, addition instead of
multiplication.
The simplest math you learned in first
grade might be what finally breaks
Nvidia's grip on artificial
intelligence.
Thank you.